---
layout: post
title:  "<i style='text-decoration:underline;'>How</i> Jekyll Works"
date:   2019-02-24 16:01:57 -0500
categories: test
icon: floppydisk
---


<!--## Table of Contents
* There will be a ToC (and this line will not appear)
{:toc}
-->

## 🔧 This article is still under development 🔧

In this tutorial you will gain an understanding of how static site generators like Jekyll function so you can more confidentially understand Jekyll tutorials and edit/build your own static site.


##### By the end of this tutorial you should feel comfortable explaining to a friend:
- static site
- dynamic site
- Jekyll
- templating engine
- tba


### Interacting with Static/Dynamic Sites

For those of you who appreciate a good diagram (you have come to the right post 😉) here is  how users access/interact with a website based on it's type (static v. dynamic). Each computation needed to show the webpage is depicted by arrows which are labeled chronologically.

#### Static Site
<div class="mermaid">
graph TD;
    A["fa:fa-laptop User Request"]
    B["fa:fa-server Server"]
    A-->|1| B;
    B-->|2| A;
</div>

Files are served ( and cached ) immediately on request. No additional work - no DB queries or templating engine used.  

**Static Site Examples**
- This page you are reading! ( which was generated with Jekyll )
- add another example


#### Dynamic Site
<div class="mermaid">
graph TD;
    A["fa:fa-laptop User Request"]
    B["fa:fa-server Server"]
    C["fa:fa-database DB"]
    D["&#123&#123 &#125&#125 Templating Engine"]
    A-->|1| B;
    B-->|4| A;
    B-->|2| C;
    B-->|3| D;
</div>
If the term templating engine is confusing hold off till later in this post where it is explained.

**Dynamic Site Examples**
- Django Web Apps
- Any WordPress Site ( or any database-driven CMS)
- link to a website




#### So What is Jekyll?
Jekyll is a static site generator that runs on the Ruby programming language. You don't need to know *any* ruby to create a site generated by Jekyll but, if you want to make a lot of customizations, knowledge of ruby will be needed.

Moreover, Jekyll compiles/generates a static site from a predefined file structure. This file structure provides a way to
 break up bits of html and markdown into logical units and then assemble them into a single html page. In the following sections I will describe how these little bits fit together to create a static html document/page.



#### How a Jekyll Page is Created

In the `_layouts/` directory you define the templates of your different webpage types ( e.g. the general page structure, blog post, a page).



**default.html**
```
{% raw %}
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
{% include head.html %}

<body class="light-mode">

	{% include header.html %}
	<main id="main-content">
		<article class="container">
			{{ content }}
		</article>

	</main>
	{% include footer.html %}
</body>
{% endraw %}
```

This code block should look pretty familiar to all the important stuff in an html page
albeit an essentially blank page.

The  `%}` and `{}` are liquid tags. These are the bread and butter of most templating engines. These tags say go get this content.
**Explain templating engine**

Templates (defined in `_layouts`) can inherit from other templates in the `_layouts` folder. If you take a look at the first few lines of page.html, you see that the page.html template extends the default.html template. In Jekyll think of the terms layout and template as interchangable.


##### Here are the first few lines of page.html
```
---
layout: page
title: About me
permalink: /about/
---
```

Text like this does some defining for how these pieces fit together. `layout` defines which template this file is extending. `permalink` defines where this file will go in the `_sites` folder.


##### Generating My About Me Page
Below is my best attempt to show how these bits are put together to create a full html document.

<div class="mermaid">
graph TD;
subgraph  &#95;includes/
  A["fa:fa-file head.html"]
  B["fa:fa-file header.html"]
  C["fa:fa-file footer.html"]
end


subgraph  &#95;layouts/

  subgraph default.html
      D1["&#123;% include head.html %&#125;"]
      D2["&#123;% include header.html %&#125;"]
      D3["&#123;&#123; content &#125;&#125;"]
      D4["&#123;% include footer.html %&#125;"]
  end

  subgraph page.html
      E1["&#123;&#123; page.title &#125;&#125;"]
      E2["&#123;&#123; content &#125;&#125;"]
  end
end

subgraph  &#95;pages/
  G["fa:fa-file 01_about.md"]
end

subgraph  &#95;site/about/
  H["fa:fa-file index.html"]
end


G-->E1
G-->E2
E1-->D3
E2-->D3

A-->D1
B-->D2
C-->D4

D1-->H
D2-->H
D3-->H
D4-->H
</div>


So when you are running the command `jekyll serve` you are not just starting a local host server but, you are actually asking your computer to take all of these bits and put them together in the structure you( or your theme ) have defined.




#### How Sass works
Think of Sass as a Jekyll generator for your CSS file. It works in a a similar way where you keep all of your variables in one place and then have your template in another. These files are then compiled/built into one main.css. The nice thing about using sass is really with colors; if you say `$blue = #somehex code`, you don't have to remember that hex code just use `$blue` instead!



<hr>
### Sources
https://www.taniarascia.com/make-a-static-website-with-jekyll/
https://www.jappoker.com/blog/2018/markdown-grammar/
https://mermaidjs.github.io/  
for more info on liquid tags see [this documentation](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/basics/introduction/)
